#StarSchema
今天学习的是星型模型设计，今天的任务是总结一个框架出来

Following is the outline of this course:
- Data Warehouse Basis
- Data Warehouse Architecture
- Dimensional Modeling
	- Facts
	- Dimensions
	- Slowly Changing Dimensions
- ETL
	- Process
	- Tools
	- ETL vs ELT
- Using a Data Warehouse
- Optimizing a Data Warehouse
- The Modern Data Warehouse



## 1. Purpose of Building Up a Data Warehouse
1. Store data
2. Analyze data


## 2. Data Warehouse Layers
---
>[!abstract] THE LAYERS
>1. Data Source Layer
>2. Stagging Layer ( ODS for Chinese Region )
>3. Cleansing Layer ( TMP for Chinese Region )
>4. Core Data Warehouse Layer ( DWD and DWS for Chinese Region )
>5. Data Mart layer ( ADS for Chinese Region)


In the most cases, we use *schema* to separate these layers and keep all the data in one database.

In some cases, the Data Mart / ADS layer is separated or copied into another database (usually OLAP DB which uses techniques like *column stored*, *in-memory*, *parallel query plans*) for increasing of query performance. 

### 2.1 Staging Layer
---
**Purposes:**
1. Less resource spent on the source systems -> only pull data once
2. Extract source data more quickly
3. Move all data into relational database
4. For further transformation jobs
5. Always keep the data in the data warehouse because the source changes

**Methods:**
1. Temporary staging layer - after each round of ETL process, the tables are *truncated*
2. Persistent staging layer - *never truncate* the tables


### 2.2 Data Marts
---
Usually it's described as a "smaller DWH". Not totally wrong but there are reasons behind having an additional Data Marts after your DWH, and that is not merely to replicate all the data again.

**Purposes:**
1. For large companies, it serves as a subset of your core data warehouse layer
2. Further *aggregate* vs DW layer
3. Dimensional Model

**Pros:**
1. Usability: less tables to be accessed by the business users
2. Performance: a separated layer to use *specialized technology for fast query performance* ( e.g. [[Olap引擎选型]] )
3. Different *use cases*, e.g.
	1. Different tools use different types of database
	2. Different groups of people use different subset of data

> [!question] When to use a Data Mart?
> Whenever it solves your business problem


### 2.3 Data Warehouse
---
#### 2.3.1 Relational databases
In relational databases, we store tables and use *primary key* and *foreign key* to record relations and we can use `JOIN` in SQL to query them.

> During the period of 70s - 90s, people struggling with the logic and performance of multiple tables and their relations. Now relational database with multiple tables are more usable and it is a game changer at that time.

**RDMS products:**
- Oracle
- Microsoft SQL Server
- PostgreSQL
- MySQL
- Amazon Relational Database Service (RDS)
- Azure SQL databases

#### 2.3.2 In-memory databases
Traditional database is stored in disc and querying it cost lots of response time. In-memory database eliminate the response time.

**Pros:**
- Highly optimized for query performance
- Good for Analytics / High query volume
- Usually used for data marts
- Relational and non-relational

**Techniques:**
- In-memory 
- Columnar storage
- Parallel query plans

**Limitation:**
- Durability: lose all information when device loses power or is reset 
- Solution: snapshots or images stored on disc
- Cost-factor
- Traditional DBs also trying reduce usage of disc

**In-Memory DBs in RDMS context:**
- SAP HANA
- MS SQL Server In-Memory Tables
- Oracle In-Memory
- Amazon Memory DB

#### 2.3.3 Cubes (obsolete)
Traditionally, DWH are based on Relational DBMS (ROLAP). While when data are stored in Non-relational databases, we call it Cube (MOLAP). Cube means multidimensional dataset.

Cube stores arrays instead of tables, and therefore, it provides fast query performance and works well with many BI solutions.

It uses Multi-Dimensional Expression (MDX) that is developed by MS and it's now the most commonly used query language for cubes.

> [!Success] Key Points
> 1. High performance
> 2. Interactive BI tools to drill / slice & dice
> 3. Multi-dimensional DBs
> 4. Uses MDX language

Nowadays, it becomes *more and more obsolete* because the *cost of learning and resource*.

The alternative is to use Tabular models (SSAS), ROLAP or columnar storage databases.

